Add Anomaly detector plugin doc. (#3569)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _data-prepper/pipelines/configuration/processors/anomaly-detector.md

| Name | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `keys` | Yes | A non-ordered `List<String>` that is used as input to the ML algorithm to detect anomalies in the values of the keys in the list. At least one key is required.
| `mode` | Yes | The ML algorithm (or model) used to detect anomalies. You must provide a mode. See [random_cut_forest mode](#random_cut_forest-mode).

### Keys

Keys that are used in the anomaly detector processor are present in the input event. For example, if the input event is `{"key1":value1, "key2":value2, "key3":value3}`, then any of the keys (such as `key1`, `key2`, `key3`) in that input event can be used as anomaly detector keys as long as their value (such as `value1`, `value2`, `value3`) is an integer or real number.

### random_cut_forest mode

The random cut forest (RCF) ML algorithm is an unsupervised algorithm for detecting anomalous data points within a dataset. To detect anomalies, the anomaly detector processor uses the `random_cut_forest` mode.

| Name | Description |
| :--- | :--- |
| `random_cut_forest` | Processes events using the RCF ML algorithm to detect anomalies. | 

> RCF is an unsupervised ML algorithm for detecting anomalous data points within a data set. Data Prepper uses RCF to detect anomalies in the data by passing the values of the configured key to RCF. For example, when an event with a latency value of 11.5 is sent, the follow anomaly event is generated:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RCF is an unsupervised ML algorithm for detecting anomalous data points within a dataset. Data Prepper uses RCF to detect anomalies in data by passing the values of the configured key to RCF. For example, when an event with a latency value of 11.5 is sent, the following anomaly event is generated:
```

---
layout: default

> title: anomaly_detector

Reviewer: I agree that this format is better in terms of reader comprehension.

> title: anomaly_detector

Reviewer: @Naarcha-AWS @carolxob Please work together to use @vagimeli feedback to decide on a consistent approach to this issue. Once you have decided on an approach, please apply it across the affected docs.

> title: anomaly_detector

Author: @natebower @vagimeli @Naarcha-AWS Because this doc already appears in the "Processors" section, it would be redundant for now. My suggestion is to keep the naming convention consistent with the rest of the docset, then put in an issue (which I will own) to address that specific change in bulk. That way the entire docset naming convention will remain consistent.

> title: anomaly_detector

Author: The issue that will address this is #3802.

| Name | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `keys` | Yes | A non-ordered `List<String>` that is used as input to the ML algorithm to detect anomalies in the values of the keys in the list. At least one key is required.
| `mode` | Yes |  The ML algorithm (or model) used to detect anomalies. You must provide a mode. See [random_cut_forest mode](#random_cut_forest-mode).

### Keys

Keys that are used in the anomaly detector processor are present in the input event. For example, if the input event is `{"key1":value1, "key2":value2, "key3":value3}`, then any of the keys (such as `key1`, `key2`, `key3`) in that input event can be used as anomaly detector keys as long as their value (such as `value1`, `value2`, `value3`) is an integer or real number.

### random_cut_forest mode

The random cut forest (RCF) ML algorithm is an unsupervised algorithm for detecting anomalous data points within a dataset. To detect anomalies, the anomaly detector processor uses the `random_cut_forest` mode.

| Name | Description |
| :--- | :--- |

> | `random_cut_forest` | Processes events using the RCF ML algorithm to detect anomalies. After passing a group of events with latency, a value between 0.2 and 0.3 is passed through the anomaly detector processor. When an event with latency value 11.5 is sent, the following anomaly event is generated.| 

Reviewer: I'd prefer that we not introduce within the table what follows it. Do we need to include the last sentence, or is line 36 sufficient?

Author: @natebower The example contains all of the information in this sentence, so it's safe to remove it.

> | `random_cut_forest` | Processes events using Random Cut Forest ML algorithm to detect anomalies. After passing a group of events with `latency`, a value between `0.2` and `0.3` is passed through the `anomaly_detector` processor. When an event with `latency` value `11.5` is sent, the following anomaly event is generated. See [Random Cut Forest (RCF) Algorithm](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/randomcutforest.html) for more details.| 

Author: @kkondaka Should we link to this instead? Or keep the existing link?
https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/algorithms/#rcf

Author: Confirmed: we will not be using this link, it doesn't apply.

The following example shows what happens in the anomaly detector processor when it receives input:

 ```json
  { "latency": 11.5, "deviation_from_expected":[10.469302736820003],"grade":1.0}
```

In this example, `deviation_from_expected` is a list of deviations for each of the keys from their corresponding expected values, and `grade` is the anomaly grade that indicates the anomaly severity.
     

You can configure `random_cut_forest` mode with the following options. 

| Name | Default value | Range | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |

> | `shingle_size` | `4` | 1 - 60 | The shingle size used in the ML algorithm. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `shingle_size` | `4` | 1--60 | The shingle size used in the ML algorithm. |
```

> | `shingle_size` | `4` | 1 - 60 | The shingle size used in the ML algorithm. |

Reviewer: Use an en dash in ranges, and do not include spacing on either side.

> | `sample_size` | `256` | 100 - 2500 | The sample size size used in the ML algorithm. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `sample_size` | `256` | 100--2500 | The sample size used in the ML algorithm. |
```

> In this example, `deviation_from_expected` is a list of deviations for each of the keys from their corresponding expected values, and `grade` is the anomaly grade that indicates the severity of the anomaly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, `deviation_from_expected` is a list of deviations for each of the keys from their corresponding expected values, and `grade` is the anomaly grade that indicates the anomaly severity.
```

> | `time_decay` | `0.1` | 0 - 1.0 | The time decay value used in the ML algorithm. Used as the mathematical expression `timeDecay` divided by `SampleSize` in the ML algorithm. |

Author: @vagimeli I reworded this to more accurately describe what `timeDecay` and `SampleSize` represented here. It is a mathematical expression.

> | `time_decay` | `0.1` | 0 - 1.0 | The time decay value used in the ML algorithm. Used as the mathematical expression `timeDecay` divided by `SampleSize` in the ML algorithm. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `time_decay` | `0.1` | 0--1.0 | The time decay value used in the ML algorithm. Used as the mathematical expression `timeDecay` divided by `SampleSize` in the ML algorithm. |
```

| `type` | `metrics` | N/A | The type of data sent to the algorithm. |
| `version` | `1.0` | N/A | The algorithm version number. |

## Usage

> To get started, create the following `pipeline.yaml` file. You can use the following pipeline configuration to look for anomalies in the `latency` field in events that are passed to the processor. Then, you can use the following YAML configuration file `random_cut_forest` mode to detect anomalies:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started, create the following `pipeline.yaml` file. You can use the following pipeline configuration to look for anomalies in the `latency` field in events that are passed to the processor. Then you can use the following YAML configuration file `random_cut_forest` mode to detect anomalies:
```

> To get started, create the following `pipeline.yaml` file. You can use the following pipeline configuration to look for anomalies in the `latency` field in events that are passed to the processor. Then, you can use the following YAML configuration file `random_cut_forest` mode to detect anomalies:

Reviewer: Skip the comma after single-word adverbs of time at the beginning of a sentence, such as afterward, then, later, or subsequently.

> To get started, create the following `pipeline.yaml` file. You can use the following pipeline configuration to look for anomalies in the `latency` field in events that are passed to the processor. Then, you can use the following `yaml` configuration file `random_cut_forest` mode to detect anomalies:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To get started, create the following `pipeline.yaml` file. You can use the following pipeline configuration to look for anomalies in the `latency` field in events that are passed to the processor. Then, you can use the following YAML configuration file `random_cut_forest` mode to detect anomalies:
```

```yaml
ad-pipeline:
  source:
    http:
  processor:
    - anomaly_detector:
        keys: ["latency"]
        mode: 
            random_cut_forest:
  sink:
    - stdout:
```

> When you run the anomaly detector processor, the extracted value parses the messages and extracts the values for the `latency` key, then passes it through the RCF ML algorithm. You can configure any key that comprises integers or real numbers as values. In the following example, you can configure `bytes` or `latency` as the key for an anomaly detector. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you run the anomaly detector processor, the extracted value parses the messages, extracts the values for the `latency` key, and then passes it through the RCF ML algorithm. You can configure any key that comprises integers or real numbers as values. In the following example, you can configure `bytes` or `latency` as the key for an anomaly detector. 
```

> When you run the anomaly detector processor, the extracted value parses the messages and extracts the values for the `latency` key, then passes it through the RCF ML algorithm. You can configure any key that comprises integers or real numbers as values. In the following example, you can configure `bytes` or `latency` as the key for an anomaly detector. 

Reviewer: In "and then passes it", can we name "it"? What noun are we referencing? Also, the last sentence should end in a colon if it introduces an example.

Author: @kkondaka Can you please clarify what "it" refers to here?

> When you run the `anomaly_detector` processor, the extracted value parses the messages and extracts the values for the `latency` key, then passes it through the `random_cut_forest` ML algorithm. You can configure any key that is comprised of integers or real numbers as values. In the following example, you can configure `bytes` or `latency` as the key for an anomaly detector. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you run the anomaly detector processor, the extracted value parses the messages and extracts the values for the `latency` key, then passes it through the RCF ML algorithm. You can configure any key that comprises integers or real numbers as values. In the following example, you can configure `bytes` or `latency` as the key for an anomaly detector. 
```

> When you run the `anomaly_detector` processor, the extracted value parses the messages and extracts the values for the `latency` key, then passes it through the `random_cut_forest` ML algorithm. You can configure any key that is comprised of integers or real numbers as values. In the following example, you can configure `bytes` as an anomaly detector. 

Reviewer 3: In the following example of input event, you can configure `bytes` or `latency` as the key for anomaly detector.

Configuration for this processor involves specifying a key and specifying options for the mode. You can use the following options to configure the `Anomaly detector` processor.

| Name | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `keys` | Yes | A non-ordered `List<String>` which are used as inputs to the ML algorithm to detect anomalies in the values of the keys in the list. At least one key is required.
| `mode` | Yes |  The machine learning (ML) algorithm (or model) to use to detect anomalies. One of the existing [Modes](#modes) must be provided. See [random_cut_forest](#random_cut_forest).

### Keys

### random_cut_forest mode

<!--- Add description for the random_forest_cut mode.--->

| Name | Description |
| :--- | :--- |
| `random_cut_forest` | Processes events using Random Cut Forest ML algorithm to detect anomalies. After passing a bunch of events with `latency` value between 0.2 and 0.3 are passed through the anomaly detector, when an event with `latency` value 11.5 is sent, the following anomaly event will be generated. See [Random Cut Forest (RCF) Algorithm](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/randomcutforest.html) for more details.| 

>  ```json

Author: @dlvenable @asifsmohammed What is the purpose of this JSON file? How are we supposed to use it? And how does it relate to the text that follows on the next line?

Reviewer 3: The purpose of the JSON snippet is to show what happens in the anomaly detector processor when that input is received by the processor. We use the similar style of example snippet in other processors too. The text following explains what happens to the event (mentioned in json snippet) when it passes through the processor.

       

You can configure `random_cut_forest` mode with the following options. 

 <!--- Convert to table.--->

* `shingle_size` - shingle size to be used in the ML algorithm
  * Default: `4`
  * Range: 1 - 60
* `sample_size` - sample size size to be used in the ML algorithm
  * Default: `256`
  * Range: 100 - 2500
* `time_decay` - time decay value to be used in the ML algorithm. Used as (timeDecay/SampleSize) in the ML algorithm
  * Default: `0.1`
  * Range: 0 - 1.0
* `type` - Type of data that is being sent to the algorithm
  * Default: `metrics`
  * Others types like `traces` will be supported in future
* `version` - version of the algorithm
  * Default: `1.0`

## Usage

To get started, create the following `pipeline.yaml` file. You can use the following pipeline configuration to look for anomalies in the `latency` field in events passed to the processor. The following `yaml` configuration file uses the `random_cut_forest` mode to detect anomalies.

```yaml
ad-pipeline:
  source:
    http:
  processor:
    - anomaly_detector:
        keys: ["latency"]
        mode: 
            random_cut_forest:
  sink:
    - stdout:
```

> When you run the `Anomaly detector` processor, it parses the messages and extracts the values for the `latency` key, then passes it through `RandomCutForest` machine-learning algorithm.

Author: @dlvenable @asifsmohammed 

1. "...extracts the values for the `latency` key, then passes it..." - Passes what? The key?
2. Where does `RandomCutForest` as it is typed here appear? Is it accurate? Does it need to align with other instances in this doc as `random_cut_forest`? Should we say random_cut_forest mode?
3. Is parsing the correct terminlogy? Is it necessary to include it?
4. Is latency the only option for the key? What are there other keys?

| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `keys` | Yes | A non-ordered `List<String>` which are used as inputs to the ML algorithm to detect anomalies in the values of the keys in the list. At least one key is required.
| `mode` | Yes |  The ML algorithm (or model) to use to detect anomalies. One of the existing [Modes](#modes) must be provided. See [random_cut_forest](#random_cut_forest).

### Keys

<!--- Make the following into a table.--->

### random_cut_forest mode
* `random_cut_forest`: Processes events using Random Cut Forest ML algorithm to detect anomalies.
  * After passing a bunch of events with `latency` value between 0.2 and 0.3 are passed through the anomaly detector, when an event with `latency` value 11.5 is sent, the following anomaly event will be generated
  * More details about this can be found at https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/randomcutforest.html
        ```json
            { "latency": 11.5, "deviation_from_expected":[10.469302736820003],"grade":1.0}
        ```
        Where `deviation_from_expected` is a list of deviations for each of the keys from their corresponding expected values and `grade` is the anomaly grade indicating the severity of the anomaly

> 

Author: @dlvenable @asifsmohammed Are there any other modes that exist, or is this the only one?

Reviewer 3: Currently, there is only one mode. We do this way to allow supporting other modes in the future.

       

You can configure `random_cut_forest` mode with the following options. 

 <!--- Convert to table.--->

* `shingle_size` - shingle size to be used in the ML algorithm
  * Default: `4`
  * Range: 1 - 60
* `sample_size` - sample size size to be used in the ML algorithm
  * Default: `256`
  * Range: 100 - 2500
* `time_decay` - time decay value to be used in the ML algorithm. Used as (timeDecay/SampleSize) in the ML algorithm
  * Default: `0.1`
  * Range: 0 - 1.0
* `type` - Type of data that is being sent to the algorithm
  * Default: `metrics`
  * Others types like `traces` will be supported in future
* `version` - version of the algorithm
  * Default: `1.0`

## Usage

To get started, create the following `pipeline.yaml` file. You can use the following pipeline configuration to look for anomalies in the `latency` field in events passed to the processor. The following `yaml` configuration file uses the `random_cut_forest` mode to detect anomalies.

```yaml
ad-pipeline:
  source:
    http:
  processor:
    - anomaly_detector:
        keys: ["latency"]
        mode: 
            random_cut_forest:
  sink:
    - stdout:
```

> When you run the `Anomaly detector` processor, it parses the messages and extracts the values for the `latency` key, then passes it through `RandomCutForest` machine-learning algorithm.

Author: @dlvenable @asifsmohammed 

1. "...extracts the values for the `latency` key then passes it..." - What is being passed? The key?
2. Where does `RandomCutForest` as it is typed here appear? Is it accurate to be spelled out this way? Does it need it need to appear exactly the same throughout this doc? (`random_cut_forest`). 
3. Is "parsing" the correct terminology? Is it necessary to include it?
4. Is latency the only option for the key? What are examples of some other keys?

Reviewer 3: 1. "it" refers to the "value" extracted is passed
2. Yes, It should be `random_cut_forest`
3. I think "parsing" is the right terminology but if you have some other word in mind that might work too. Basically, the anomaly detector processor looks at each message ("message" can also be called "event", if that makes more sense) and extracts the values for specified/configured keys
4. In the example input, it is assumed that "latency" is one of the keys in the input event. I guess this can be made more clear by mentioning the complete event like `{"ip":"1.2.3.4", "bytes":234234, "latency":0.2}` as the input event and then anomaly detector is configured to use "latency" as the key. They could configure any key that has number (integers or real numbers) values. So, even "bytes" can be configured to be used as anomaly detector in the given example.

---
layout: default
title: Anomaly detector
parent: Processors
grand_parent: Pipelines
nav_order: 45
---

# Anomaly detector

## Overview

> The `Anomaly detector` processor takes structured data and runs anomaly detection algorithms on fields you can configure in the data. The data must be either an integer or real number in order for the the anomaly detection algorithm to detect anomalies. We recommend that you deploy the `Aggregate` processor in a pipeline before the `Anomaly detector` processor to achieve the best results.  This is because the `Aggregate` processor aggregates events with same keys onto the same host.

Author: @dlvenable  @asifsmohammed How does this ensure users will get the best results? How does aggregating events with the same keys onto the same host ensure that those results are better?

Reviewer 3: I do not think we can say "ensure". It is just a recommendation to aggregate events over a time period instead of raw data.  When aggregate processor is used "same keys on to the same host" automatically happens. So, if we are looking for anomaly in latencies from specific IP address(like 1.2.3.4) if all these events go to same host then that host will have more data about events with 1.2.3.4 IP address, more data results in better training of ML algorithm, which should result in better anomaly detection.

> The `Anomaly detector` processor takes structured data and runs anomaly detection algorithms on fields you can configure in the data. The data must be either an integer or real number in order for the the anomaly detection algorithm to detect anomalies. We recommend that you deploy the `Aggregate` processor before the `Anomaly detector` processor in a pipeline to achieve the best results because the `Aggregate` processor aggregates events with same keys onto the same host. <!--- This needs some clarification.--->

Author: @dlvenable @asifsmohammed How does this ensure they will get the best results?

> This processor uses the random cut forest mode to detect anomalies. 

Author: Are there other modes? If so, what are they? They will need as much information as the random_cut_forest mode has.

Reviewer 3: Currently, there is only one mode.

> This processor uses the `random_cut_forest` mode to detect anomalies. 

Author: @dlvenable @asifsmohammed Are there other modes? If so, we need to give them as much detail as `random_cut_forest`.

Reviewer 3: Currently, there is only one mode.

## Configuration

Configuration for this processor involves specifying a key and specifying options for the mode. You can use the following options to configure the `Anomaly detector` processor.

| Name | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `keys` | Yes | A non-ordered `List<String>` which are used as inputs to the ML algorithm to detect anomalies in the values of the keys in the list. At least one key is required.
| `mode` | Yes |  The ML algorithm (or model) to use to detect anomalies. One of the existing [Modes](#modes) must be provided. See [random_cut_forest](#random_cut_forest).

### Keys

> 

Reviewer 3: Keys to be used in anomaly detector are any keys that are present in the input event. So if the input event is like this `{"key1":value1, "key2":value2, "key3":value3....}` any of the keys (ie `key1`, `key2`, `key3`...) in the input event can be used as anomaly detector keys as long as their value (ie `value1`, `value2`, `value3`...) is of NUMBER (real or integer) type
